JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another
in our Brief But Spectacular
series, where we ask people
to describe their passions.
Tonight, we hear from
British activist and
attorney Alexander McLean.
He is the founder of the
Ugandan-based African
Prisons Project, which
seeks to improve the
lives of people
imprisoned in Africa.
ALEXANDER MCLEAN, Founder,
African Prisons Project: I
think that, with any of us, if
the world knew the thing about
us we are most ashamed of,
and that's all that they knew,
and that's all that they were
interested in, society would
lose out, because each of us
has much more to offer than
the worst thing we have done.
I have been working in prisons
in Uganda since I was 18,
spending a lot of time on death
row, growing up with many
of the death row inmates.
They have become
like family to me.
I have spent time in about 130
prisons all over the world.
I have seen that they're filled
with people who are poor and
not educated, and not connected.
When I was 19, I first
visited the women's prison
in Kampala, Uganda's capital.
That's where many women
were on death row.
Often, they were there
for killing a husband.
Uganda has some of the highest
rates of domestic violence in
the world, and, sometimes, when
a woman fights back, she will
find herself on death row.
That time I met Susan, she
was sentenced to death for
killing her husband when she was
21.
She shared her cell
designed for one person
with three other women.
She started a
school on death row.
She established a choir.
She was a lead in
the prison church.
I saw that Susan was
transforming her community
from the inside out.
The African Prisons Project got
her admitted into the University
of London in 2011 to study
for a law degree by
correspondence, as Nelson
Mandela had done from
prison in South Africa.
So,Susan was one of the
University of London's best
students in human rights law.
She established a legal aid
clinic in her prison, helping
scores of her fellow inmates
to be released from prison.
She led a case, Susan Kigula
and 417 others, where all of
the death row inmates in Uganda
challenged the mandatory
death sentence for
murder and armed robbery.
As a result of this case,
Susan and hundreds of others
were released from death row.
She's now completed
her law degree.
Uganda's most senior
judge invited her to apply
to join the judiciary.
She said: I won't, and now I'm
going to train women in prison
in the law, so they can use
the law to protect their
families and their communities.
We're in the process of
establishing the world's first
prison-based law college.
We're then going to establish a
prison-based law firm, through
which they provide services
to their peers.
We have seen about 3,000 people
released from prison in Uganda
and Kenya, having accessed
legal services from
prisoners and prison
staff we have trained.
The law is seen as
a profession for the
privileged, for the elite.
We want to change that thinking.
We recognize that, actually, the
law is here to serve all of us.
We want to see people getting
out of prison, becoming lawyers
and judges, and politicians,
and legal academics, and
business leaders, going from the
margins of society to the center
of it.
My name is Alexander McLean.
This is my Brief But Spectacular
take on the power of the law
in the hands of the poor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you
can watch more Brief But
Spectacular videos on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.